IL Cafe we have you
covered welcome to Il Cafe this is
shidel and guess what in recent times I
watched a very interesting series uh on
one of the OT platforms and it featured
it's actually a true crime series and it
featured prominently a malpractice
lawyer in the area of medicine so this
conversation is like oh my God how
interesting is that because I was just
wanting to read up a little bit more on
the topic and guess what we've got that
theme going for us on I Cafe today
welcome to the show this is all about
professional Indemnity for doctors we
need to understand this area a bit
better and joining us today is an expert
from icso Lombard who will add so much
more to this conversation and I'm sure
uh make us a little bit more aware about
this area Rohit ranjan is here he's DVP
underwriting liability thank you so much
Rohit and welcome to I Cafe how are you
I'm fine sh thank you and it's always a
pleasure to be a part of uh these kind
of discussion especially a very relevant
topic which is professional indry for
doctors but before we dive into the
actual questions of the Contours of the
subject you would have also come across
some real life examples in your
experience Rohit that help us understand
why this topic is important I came
across it in a series on Netflix but I'm
sure yours are more real than that yeah
so I'll share a story with you uh she
this goes back to the co period and uh
there was a Doctor by name Mr Rahul
Kapoor he was he's a renowned
cardiologist and in the midst of
pandemic he faced a challenging case
where in he was alleged by a patient uh
of a misdiagnosis which has led to
certain complication now Dr kabor had a
peer insurance and that not only helped
him to cover up for the legal expenses
but he also got assisted for choosing
right kind of legal counsil as well and
which eventually you know victed his
diagnosis and you know this ultimately
helped him to protect his reputation and
uh that kind of reinforce our you know
confidence in the fact that it is always
important to have a safety net around
our you know Professional Services that
we are rendering what are Rohit some of
those key considerations for determining
the sum insured or the limit of
Indemnity help us to understand this the
sum insured is a factor which get
determined by various underlying factors
which includes your specialization what
field you are specialized in a
cardiologist can be a different exposure
than a Pediatrics where your services
are getting offered a tier two or tier
three cities is generally considered a
lower kind of risk than a tier 1 cities
and the type of services that you are
offering what kind of specialization you
have what kind of machines you have what
kind of procedure you are going to you
know uh Implement so it is always
essential to assess the potential risk
which are involved with your medical
offerings and choose a su ins short
which add adequately cover the
Professional Services that you are
offering right right so that answered
another question has popped up in my
head right in terms of the legal defense
aspect of things how does uh you know
this Pi Insurance handle situations
where there are multiple parties
involved for example there's a medical
team working on a very complex case so
how does uh Pi insurance cover this area
so Shel it's a very fantastic question I
must say and and this keeps on coming to
us you know uh when we talk to the
Consultants when we talk to the client
directly and uh in fact we had a case
wherein a surgical team was involved in
a very complicated procedure and the
complication start manifesting after
surgery and the patient family filed a
claim implicating the uh entire member
of the surgery team and in such
situation Pi Insurance not only ensur
legal representation for each member
recognizing their individual
contributions so whatever they were you
know doing probably somebody was
providing anesthesia somebody was just a
nursing staff So based on their role and
responsibilities this was uh this policy
provided coverage to them and in this
you know this kind of collaborative
approach uh of Defense you know kind of
help in addressing the complexities that
can arise from a multi-party claims as
well interesting because that whole
thing right when you're in an OT for
example it's not a just a one man show
or a one woman show uh that is is you
know responsible for your well-being
over there so interesting to understand
this but you know what about the process
of renewing Pi or professional Indemnity
insurance Rohit are there any changes or
considerations that doctors should keep
in mind while renewing their policies
renewing of Pi insurance is a very
straightforward process it doesn't
require much of a you know complication
however it is advised that in case uh
the doctor has acquired some new
specialization or there is a significant
change in the patient load
uh it is expected that he should he or
she should communicate uh to the
insurance company uh I'll just explain
it uh by an example so let's say a
doctor has expanded its service and
included a new medical procedure in the
existing uh you know scheme of things
and during the renewal process they
communicated that you know uh that I
have you know Incorporated these
Services as well in over and above what
I was offering last year we adjusted the
coverage to ensure that the coverage is
adequate and you know cover the entire
scope of practice so in my opinion
communication with the insurance
provider is a key during renewal process
and it should be taken with utmost good
faith now to come to the other aspect
right we spoke about this touched upon
it very briefly right in the beginning
of the definition of uh professional
Indemnity insurance but can you tell us
a little bit on this legal defense
aspect of Pi Insurance what does it
really cover absolutely sh so Pi
insurance cover legal fle including the
cost of repres presentation incurred
during investigation or legal procedure
it also ensured that a doctor have you
know financial support to navigate to
the legal challenges arising from the
allegation of professional malpractice
or a negligence that s claims right we
often talk about claims we' have spoken
about in fact on the ale Cafe series the
process of claims and how that is
simplified through the use of Technology
we've um highlighted a specific one for
motor claims and so on in recent times
on a recent episode but I want to
understand Pi insurance and the claims
process over here can you walk us
through that area because it clearly is
a lot of headache you know is uh taken
on oneself even if it does not have to
be there on account of oh my God how
does one do the claims process so please
tell us more J claim is a Moment of
Truth for any insurance company and this
is where you know we can differentiate
ourselves from what has been provided by
other competition so we are very you
know diligent while handling a claim
like situation a claim procedure
generally involved reporting the
incident promptly to the you know the
insurance company and once it is
reported the insurance company will
assess the claim provide you the legal
representation and advises if necessary
and if at all there is a cost which is
associated with the claim shall be born
by the insurance company it also include
all the component which are kind of a
settlement or award uh in nature okay
got it settlements and awards also
included now to come to a question that
I think I should have asked you right in
the beginning but I feel better late
than never uh do Physicians or
Healthcare professionals have to go
through any specific kind of training or
obtain some kind of certification or
have some number of years of service Etc
to qualify for a professional Indemnity
insurance coverage do you have any such
things uh Shel no it is not required
generally any qualified medical
professional who is uh having a valid uh
license to practice in Indian uh soil
can apply for a pi insurance policy and
any kind of specific training or
certification beyond the standard you
know medical qualification is not a a
prerequisite to buy an insurance policy
you can go ahead with the basics as well
like if you're an mbbs you can buy a
policy along with other you know uh
qualifications to zoom out of the
conversation a little bit you know when
I came here like I said this is a
totally different topic for me and
there's a lot of curiosity in fact I
would imagine there's also a lot of lack
of awareness around the uh availability
of such a coverage professional
Indemnity insurance how has this
landscape in your experience Rohit
evolved over a period of time especially
in responses to challenges like we face
like in the pandemic for example how
have you seen the space grow so surely C
the pandemic has heightened you know the
awareness and vulnerabilities faced by
Healthcare professional especially what
changed was you know earlier we used to
have this practice that when we used to
visit hospital or a clinic and get
diagnosed physically and pandemic
brought it to the level that we were
only Consulting telephonically or by a
video or a zoom call like we are
connected now so uh in the response of
this changing requirement insurance
provider also adapted to the policies
and address pandemic related challenges
ensuring that the doctors have
comprehensive coverage even during those
unprecedented and challenging times
absolutely clearly the pandemic has
changed so much about the world that we
live in and on today's show we've
discovered one more area which can be of
benefit if people just focus on it so
I'm going to call to all our Healthcare
professionals over here to consider
certainly professional Indemnity
insurance as a crucial safeguard for
their careers and if you have any
questions I'm sure the team at ICS
lombar General insurance will be happy
to answer them for you but Rohit what I
am happy about is that I got to talk to
you about this particular topic and
thank you so much for coming to I Cafe
and spending time with all of our
viewers today always a pleasure you
thanks for inviting